SPEAKER 0
Last week sort of rounded out the final part of topic one, which was just looking at some more advanced mechanisms within Java for doing various object-oriented techniques. This week we're gonna actually make a jump into a thing called design patterns. Now design patents we're only gonna spend a couple of weeks on. But it is a topic to itself, and it's actually the main focus of the textbook. So you'll notice that there is a textbook with the unit. How many of you discovered the textbook? OK, crickets, again Monday morning, fair enough. So let me see if I can find where we have linked to the textbook. May not be linked directly, here it is here. Now, it's one of these ones that's done through O'Reilly. Show of hands who's played with the O'Reilly site before in another unit. OK, so that's what I thought, a fair few of you. So, uh, unfortunately for some reason, we're not one of the listed institutions, so you have to click in institution not listed, pop in your uh email. Of course yours will be a student email. Click the let's go button. And you should be able to get access. Now, um just a few things to know about this book, this book is, I think kind of a bit kitsch in the way it's, it's done, the style is full of dad jokes, which normally I would would would like, but in this case I'm not actually that fond of those. Um, but we did look at a whole bunch of different textbooks on design patterns and we kind of concluded this one was the best one out there. Um, and the reason is is because it does have a very readable style to it. Um, I, I do find it amusing too that the, uh, the lass on the front cover is obviously stock photo because I've seen her photo on three other books, but you know. So, um, before I dive into that, I wanna just talk a little bit about, um, This idea of a design pattern more generally. Nope, that's not the Gang of Four I was looking for. There we go. So design patterns are. Where's the book? I just want the book. Come on. There we go, that's what I'm looking for. Wiki page. So design patterns were a thing that kind of cropped up in the 90s, indeed, a little bit after I graduated, that became the rage around the the developer community. I want to talk about what they are and what they're not before we dive into the textbook as well. So this book is the kind of original source of this information, although there are a few, uh, books that came about before this that talked about them in, talked about design patterns but it's just a a thing as part of a larger topic. This was the first kind of dedicated book on the topic. Now the problem with this book is it's literally an encyclopaedia of design patents, so it just has, here's a patent definition, what does it do and move on. So there's no example code, there's no, no tutorial aspect to it, so it's really a reference guide. So we've not chosen that for you, um, but what design patterns are are really what developers have learnt over a number of years is a good way of arranging code. And so even though we're only doing a couple of weeks on this topic, it is kind of the main part of the unit, because even though the unit's called object oriented software design, or or object oriented, actually I keep forgetting the name of the unit, object oriented programming practises, I think is what we're now calling it, um. It really isn't about objects so much, it's about, or at least the design patent elements. It's about how do I organise the code in a medium sized application. So you guys at first you learnt a little bit about how to structure a small programme, you know, you did some stuff in processing in in Comp 1000, you did a little bit more in 1010 where you did something a little bit more low level uh with Java. But you didn't actually write a full application, and so the purpose of this unit is to try and give you a a push in that direction. So rather than just getting these little pieces of loops and so forth, and we've talked about objects and classes and the various mechanisms around that. But those things in isolation don't let you build an application. What you need is a way of actually pulling those elements together and building a programme. Now there's lots of different ways you could do it, and I'm sure a few of you in the room have tried, many probably have succeeded, but the issue is, is there's with with development is maintainability. And scalability. So you write a programme and, That's fine, you move on from the company where you're working and somebody else has to take over, or. You write a programme to do solve some little tiny problem and all of a sudden that same little programme is hanging around five years later, trying to deal with a much larger scale version of that original problem. If you happen to choose the wrong way of arranging your classes, your objects, then that maintainability and scalability will not work very well. You'll find that things break, um, they don't tend to perform very well. And so, what's the normal impulse if you, if you know, if you've walked into a, a company, somebody says, here's this programme that the previous person wrote. You need to maintain it and you need to make it work better. What do you think is the impulse that most people will have? Hm? Stress, yep, OK. So after their initial stress they're like, and then they, you know, curse at the former, the former person who's now left so they can get away with cursing at them. What's the, what's the normal reaction many developers will have at this point? They're told we need to make the programme go faster, or we need to add a new feature. Probably rewrite the thing from scratch. Um, does that sound like a good idea? I mean, sometimes it might be the, the great choice, but generally speaking, it's expensive, it's cumbersome, and what's really interesting, this isn't a unit on software engineering, but for those of you who are who are doing, not even necessarily the degree in software engineering, but maybe just one of the units like CO 2050, 1 of the things you'll you'll discover is that most software engineering projects fail. So most projects where people are writing software don't actually deliver on time, on budget, etc. Oftentimes they don't actually get completed ever. So rewriting from scratch probably isn't the best thing if you can avoid it. So the way to avoid it is to actually plan and design your programme properly in the first place. And what do we mean by properly? Well, we want to factor in the idea of scalability and maintainability. So how would you go about that? How do you actually design for scalability and maintainability? Do you guys have any thoughts on what that might entail? requirement Yep, so you need to you need to good practise good software engineering, which is to do requirements analysis and requirements gathering and so forth, that's all important. But knowing what the program's supposed to do doesn't necessarily mean that you're gonna write it well. So what other things could you do, do you think, to find out. How to best organise your programme to make it scalable, make it maintainable. What other things could you do? On set of design OK, so let's assume for the moment you don't know what design patterns are. So you've just started a company, you're a junior software developer, whatever that's called, developer, engineer, whatever they wanna call it. What might you do? Uh, Behind. Read the documentation. hard OK, so that's, so yes, writing uh magic numbers into a programme, which is what I think you're referring to is a code smell, and that's kind of a given at this point, um, but yes. Yep, so the two answers I was looking for there were documentation, read the documentation, ask the senior developer. Or developers. Why would you ask the senior developers? Mhm. So they are by by their their nature more experienced than you. And so you can learn from their experience. So, what are design patterns? Well, they're the collective wisdom of all sorts of developers over time. So one thing I want to emphasise here before we get into uh the meat of this is that these aren't something that were developed by university people. They're not some sort of abstract theory, like a lot of programming is, uh, indeed, I'm one of the people who's very big into that abstract theory and it has its uses, but at the end of the day, the person who's actually writing code for a living, Tends to have a really good idea of what works and what doesn't. Now, this is one of these wisdoms, wisdoms, the wisdom of the crowds type thing. An individual developer might have a pretty bad idea. There are lots of developers out there who do not a very good job, but collectively the industry over time has learnt what works well and what doesn't. And so what design patterns are is simply that collective idea of this is a way of arranging code to achieve a certain outcome that happens to work really well. And when I say work really well, it means that maintenance, scalability and other desirable factors are kind of baked into the design. So that's what design patterns are about. So let's actually take a look at it. The actual book that we're using. OK. Oops, for some reason it started me on the wrong chapter. Let's go right back to the beginning. I won't go over all the uh, The front stuff where they tell us about all the good things that other people have said. But let's start off with the the first part. So as I said, the bookie is a bit kitsch and it's full of dad jokes, so please take my apologies for that, but it does make it quite readable. So As I just said, one of the purposes of this is to realise that if you've got a problem when you're trying to design a programme, and again here the emphasis is on design. We will look at some actual writing some code in a minute, but at this point this is about putting the code together at a high level. Somebody else has already solved your problem. And that's the key thing to keep in mind here. So, we're gonna start off with an example application, as I said, it's full of some very weird humour, it's called a a duck simulator. I don't know, I don't know what drinking game they were playing when they came up with this, but this is what they've got. And so What they want to do is use standard object-oriented techniques to design an application that will simulate, Some ducks. Now, The way we might think about this is to go and create a class, surprise, surprise, we're gonna call that class duck. And we're gonna try and capture all the behavioural attributes of what a duck is. So what does a duck do? Well, ducks tend to quack, they tend to swim. I don't know if we want to uh uh we could say a duck itself displays, but certainly if we're talking about a programme we we might want to actually make a duck appear on the screen or some other way of making the duck manifest on in our programme. So we're gonna try and capture that basic idea. The trouble is, is that there's more than one kind of duck. So when we draw the duck on the screen, we have to have a different method to display each kind of duck. And you guys already know the mechanism at play for this. So what do we call, what's the mechanism we're using here? Just looking at that diagram, what does that tell you straight off? What what is it we're doing? We're using inheritance, right, so we're gonna say we have a super class of duck, and then we're gonna go and subclass it and create a a bunch of different kinds of ducks. Now, apparently, this simulating ducks is a very hot hot industry according to the book. So there's been lots of competition, they want to improve the product and they wanna add some new innovation. So they need to add the ability to have ducks being able to fly. So we need to add a new method called Fly. And all the other subclasses will inherit that and we'll we'll be happy, right? And indeed that's the kind of naive, simple starting point that we talk about with inheritance. So in other words, if we add a fly method up here. Then we automatically inherit that fly method, and we're done, right? We can sell the new version of the product and go and retire and drink martinis on the beach or whatever it is. The trouble is, things are rarely that simple. So what's, I was gonna say here, what went horribly wrong, or something went horribly wrong. What do you think that might be? Every Yes, very good ques uh, very good point. Can every duck fly? What about rubber ducks? Surely they're a kind of duck. Right, now I'm sure you could make a rubber duck fly, you throw it, but uh I don't think that's what's intended here. So Boy, this actually I just realised this book is showing its age. Does anybody recognise what Monster.com is? No. Do you guys know what Seek.com.au is? Yeah, Monster.com is the original version of that from America, but I don't think it exists anymore. Nonetheless. Now, now that you know what Monster.com is, I think you get the um the idea of what that's about. OK. So, the problem is, is that, as we've just pointed out, we might find that by putting an extra behaviour in the superclass, the parent class, we can add in this, this method to say we're gonna add flight, but not every subclass will necessarily have that capability or that behaviour. Now there could be a way to try and override that simply by going and overriding the, The display method here and the fly method to actually say, well, rubber ducks don't fly, but it's a little bit cumbersome. But we also discovered that If we wanna add rubber ducks, they don't they don't quack either, they tend to squeak rather than quack. So again, we've got this issue of there's a a bit of a semantic mismatch here. OK. So As I just said, we could try and fix our problems by using inheritance and then overriding in the inherited class to say, well, in a rubber duck flight, Becomes a null method, it just doesn't do anything. And that will kind of do, excuse me, do what we want, but it's, it's a bit unsatisfactory. And if we have to do it with all the methods, so we do it with quack, we do it with fly, display kind of we leave alone and go, OK, sure, we're gonna override it and draw a rubber duck on the screen, but it's, At this point, what's the point of actually having rubber duck inherit from duck? If we're only ever reusing one method. Surely we've kind of, Over, uh, exhausted the use of inheritance by doing it this way. Can everybody agree with that? I know the I know the example's a bit whimsical, but can you see the point here? We've gone and said let's inherit from duck, but we've decided that two of the three methods that duck implements, uh, we don't want. So, is, is a rubber duck a duck at this point? OK. We could try and fix our problem by using interfaces. So we could go and add interfaces for some of these attributes, or sorry, some of these behaviours, so we can create a quackable and a fliable interface, and we could actually then go and modify our class hierarchy to implement the appropriate, Uh, methods, according to our interface. Has that fixed our problem? I mean, we certainly means that we don't actually have to implement uh fliable for rubber duck. So the problem kinda goes away naturally. Quack, well, we're gonna sort of fudge quack and say squeak also applies here to make it have a different noise, that's OK. It's still emanating a noise. So this kind of fix fixes our problem. But As that little thought bubble there implies, we've still really got the same problem in disguise. Rather than inheriting using our tree here, where everything was in the superclass. And then we decided that of the 3 methods we were going to implement, 2 of them no longer applied, we've pulled out those two methods that we're just saying won't necessarily apply, put them into interfaces, so we feel like we've kind of partially fixed the problem. We now have this thing that, Rubber ducks don't need to implement flyable. But have we really fixed the problem from an architecture perspective? I mean, looking at that diagram, how complicated is that? Alright, we've already got 6, what have we got? 7 boxes, sorry, 7 classes or classes slash interfaces. To implement something pretty simple, and more importantly, how many different kinds of ducts have we implemented? 4, so we're having to generate pretty much twice as much, uh almost twice as much code just to get this, Rather unsatisfactory looking class hierarchy. So it goes part of the way there, but it doesn't really solve our problem well. What if we decide that we need to implement another 10 different kinds of ducts? Maybe we wanna add swans or some other kind of um. Poultry to our picture, chickens, if you will, as well. And then for those we might want to implement even more behaviours, and so we'd have to have an interface per behaviour. So the complexity goes up very, very quickly. I mean, this is great for some, you know, just as an aside, I, I'm pretty sure these things still exist, but for a long time there, back in the 90s, there were certainly places I knew that I had friends who worked at, where they get, got paid basically per line of code. So the more code they wrote, the more money they'd earn. So it's great for them, but you know, not a good idea architecturally. I don't think those kind of jobs exist anymore. I would actually say a good software development job actually involves cutting out a lot of code, not writing more of it. OK. The biggest problem with this is that there's an awful lot of duplicate code. If we actually go and implement this, we're gonna end up with lots of the same code just duplicated everywhere. Isn't the point of inheritance to avoid doing that? At least in some way. So again, It's a little bit better than the original starting point, but it's not great. So what could you do to fix this? Wouldn't it be great if there was a, a different mechanism we could use. To build in this idea of capturing behaviours. Putting them in classes, we could use interfaces for them, but we're not overburdening our inheritance tree with detail and then having to override it to make it disappear. OK. Now this is completely a cliche, but it's worth pointing out. So it's true in software development as it is in life in general, the only thing that is constant is change. So When I got into the industry, people really thought of programmes of static things you wrote, and then you just forgot about them. But that's never really been true and it's less true now than it ever has been. programmes change all the time. You guys notice every time you turn around there's an update for your phone, there's an update for your laptop, there's an update for everything, it's software is always changing. Some of that's due to security, some of it's just due to somebody adds a new feature or fixes something or changes the way it behaves. OK. So we've decided here that inheritance hasn't really fixed our problem. And we've kind of been at pains to point out that we have this other mechanism called interfaces, but in some sense they're also a form of inheritance. It's not the same thing as classic inheritance, but it's doing something along the same lines of saying this object is going to implement a certain thing and it's gonna get that information from somewhere else. So, The trick here is to use one of the features of object orientation called encapsulation. Now I'm sure I've mentioned this before, but, During the 90s when I was a student in object orientation had really taken off. It existed as far back as the 60s, but nobody really took much notice. And all of a sudden everybody wanted to do everything using object orientation. Because it was kind of new, at least to the industry, people were trying to figure out, well, hang on, what does it actually mean to be object oriented? And the consensus was it meant 3 things. You had encapsulation. There was encapsulation. Those of you who've done data communications with me will have a definition, but it's not quite the same definition. In terms of code, what we're saying is that data and code are stored in the same place. So if you think about your Java objects, you have an object which contains attributes and it contains methods, data and code in the same object. Languages like C don't have that behaviour. They don't have that structure. You can have data structures and you can have functions. They can be in the same file, but there's no intrinsic tie-in that says these functions operate on this data. Whereas in Java we have that built into the language. So that's what encapsulation is. But encapsulation's a little bit more than that. It also emphasises the idea of data hiding, which is just a fancy way of saying, you, you recall the public and private thing that we talked about briefly the other week. It's a way of saying, I might use an array in my object to store some information. And I'm gonna create some methods that allow me to update and retrieve information from that array. And I might decide in a year's time or 3 weeks' time or some other time to go, hm, an array was not a good choice. I'd like to change that to an array list or a queue or some other collector collection. But I don't want to change the code that uses my objects. So the other part of encapsulation is to make sure that the internals of your class, or the internals of your object are hidden away from the users of your object. And the only way to access the internals is by some fixed API, in other words, some methods that are public. So encapsulation is very much about that idea. OK. Cutting to the chase. What we want to do is figure out what the behaviours are that vary. So we've kind of decided in this example we have two behaviours that vary, quacking and flying. So, What we do is we go and create an interface that implements one of those behaviours, so flying. So we say that we have a fly behaviour. And we might have two variants, so things that can fly and things that can't fly. And we create two different implementations of that. Now notice this is an interface, it's not an inheritance diagram. And these are actual concrete classes, they're not. They're not children. The other thing you'll note here is neither of these things mention ducks. This is just saying, I'm gonna capture the idea of the of whether something can fly or it can't fly. And maybe we could extend that to have different kinds of flight, you'll notice it's kind of implied there, we're saying, no, this thing does not fly, and this thing flies with wings. Maybe we go and find life on another planet and we find biomechanical ducts that have propellers built in, right, so flies with propellers might be another option over here. But the point is here, we're encapsulating the mechanism and in doing it independently of the notion of what a duck is. And we could do the same thing with quacks. And so, Let me cut to the chase of what this is. So, what we can do is create two different interfaces with appropriate classes, so we have our fly behaviours. We also have our quack behaviours, so things that don't quack at all, things that make some kind of squeak like a rubber duck, and things that actually do quack. Now what can we do with these? Well, what we want to do is pull this behaviour into the dark, but not through an inheritance tree. What we're gonna do is we're gonna add some um methods to our duck class, so our parent class that actually have, Methods that implement these behaviours. So we're gonna create a class, rather than having a method built in that says fly, that says quack, we're gonna call out the behaviour, To a separate class. And then implement that behaviour through a method called to that other class. So in other words, we're delegating on the behaviour to a completely different object. So if we then want to use this in conjunction with our inheritance hierarchy for ducks, rather than having this as an intrinsic property. A method inside our class, we're gonna replace that, That method with a different kind of behaviour. And we can do the same thing with all our uh behaviours. Alright. So we're gonna end up with something that looks a little bit like this. So we have our behaviours, flying and cracking. The, the thing to note here for those of you who aren't picking up on what's going on yet, cos this is a little bit of a subtle thing to get. Is that originally? This was called by over here. Methods, so quack, swim, display. Um, fly, we wanted to add the fly method at the very top there. These are all methods in our original design that are part of the duck class, so they're actually methods. The change is to keep that behaviour inside the class. But instead of actually having it as a method. We're now actually putting another class, an object of another class in that spot. Right? So it's a really subtle change, but it's a powerful one. So we still have The same kind of structure, we go and create an abstract class. But when we wanna call our fly behaviour, we're not gonna call fly as an intrinsic property of our class anymore because it's no longer one. We're gonna delegate that off to this other class that we've plugged in there. OK. Alright, so what's this really all about? It's been able to change the behaviour dynamically. Because by delegating this out to another class, we can come along and put a new behaviour in, in its place. So we could change it so that the behaviour of a particular duck, we can change by simply updating, The field that contains a reference to that other object. OK. So that's Where we end up, we end up with this notion of a client. And a bunch of behaviours which are delegated out to other classes. Now those other classes can have their own class hierarchy. In this case here we're doing it using interfaces, but there's no reason why we couldn't use, uh, another inheritance hierarchy over here. So, what this is is it's changing the semantics of our class. So we're saying that rather than, And is a relationship, we have a has a relationship. So what do we mean by that? So thinking back to our original design. When we looked at the original class, It's a shame this thing doesn't have shortcuts. We look at the duck definition and it actually says that a duck is something that cracks and swims and flies. So they're intrinsic behaviour that are built into the class. But you'll also notice that that that behaviour is pretty static. I inherit the behaviour quack down here for mallard duck. And if I decide that a mallard duck quacks in a particular way, I override that behaviour. I implement that inside that method, but I can't change the way the mallard duck quack quacks at that point. It's built in and it becomes static. By changing that behaviour or that arrangement to the has a relationship. All the way down here. What we're actually able to do is we're able to override that behaviour simply by assigning a new object to it, that implements the behaviour that we want. So we can change that behaviour during the program's run time. Yeah. So, rather than something having it intrinsically, what we refer to is is something is a quack, is a fly, we can change that behaviour to say it has the property that it can quack or fly, but it's something that possesses by reference to another object. So it gives us this static, uh sorry, this dynamic ability. So that is your first design pattern, it's called the strategy pattern. In other words, we can create a class. And another hierarchy of classes, using interfaces in their example here, that implement certain behaviours or certain strategies, certain ways of doing things, and we can plug them in dynamically at will, changing the behaviour of our programme whilst it's running. Now I'm gonna step onto the next example in a minute, but I just wanna see if you guys had any questions about what that is. Cos I know it's a little bit of a, You have to get the penny to drop, so any questions? Jackie. Mhm. was I our act Yeah, so I mean your question's a little tangential to this but it's an important one. So one of the things that people always push the idea of is programming is actually mostly documentation and planning. There's actually very little of actually typing code into a compiler. Um, and that's kind of been an argument for a long time. How much of that goes on in the real company depends on that company's culture, um, but it's often tied in quite strongly with how, Well, their software is designed. Any questions on this? All right. Thank OK, so design patterns are related to software architecture. OK, so they're just a way of architecting software. So this is just one example, the book is full of a whole bunch of different examples of this. So they, the, the, I mean the the notion of a design pattern actually originally comes from buildings. It actually comes from civil engineering. So it's not an idea that's different from other engineering disciplines, but of course it looks a little different because it's software not hardware. It's software, not bricks. Right. You had a question, or are you just thinking? No, OK. All right. So, what I wanna do to look at the next design pattern is to actually, rather than talk about it in the abstract, Work through some code. We're done with that. Excellent. Great, I love it when cloud sync does not work. It's fantastic. Alright, so let's just wing it. All right. So, you recall, um, last, I think it was last week we went through an example, which was the, Gonna find where I put the jolly thing. I think it was here. Is this the one? No Maybe it was week 4. Yes, it was. So you recall we went through this thing where we went and created this pair class. You guys all remember doing that? So we had a parameterized type which had, oh, I should bump that font up, shouldn't I? Oop, maybe one too many. Alright. So you guys all remember me walking through this idea of a, a pair class. So we had parameterized by two types. We could create a pair generically based on any of those types that we wanted to feed in, and we could put some constraints on. So I'm gonna take that idea and uh work forward with it, so let me get rid of that and that. OK. Alright. So I'm gonna just get rid of these constraints because I don't want them here for this. I want to keep the original code, don't I? How about I copy that somewhere? OK dokey. OK. Yeah OK, so I'm gonna get rid of that constraint, now I've got a fresh copy of this. So I just want something that works on a pair. Alright, now. What we're gonna look at next is a pattern called observer. So let me talk a little bit about what observer is. And then we'll go ahead and implement it. If memory serves, it's the next pattern in the book, yes it is. OK. OK. So, Observe as a classic example of where in a large programme you want to actually be able to have some activity being done somewhere in the programme and other parts of your programme becoming aware that something has happened. So what do I mean by this? So let's imagine that you've built a large programme uh that interacts with the user through user interface. And the user goes ahead and fetches a file from somewhere. And so it updates something within the programme. So you've grabbed a file from somewhere on the internet, you've stored it on the local disc, and that's what this local bit of code does, so you have a a a class or an object that does this for you. But It's not enough just to download a file. If you've got a large application, let's think about something like, well, an IDE is a really good example, so we think of VS code. So VS Code has all sorts of moving parts to it, but one of those is this idea that I can open multiple tabs, multiple windows and create new files. What parts of the programme might want to know that I've added a new file? Right, so I've got this thing that lets me edit multiple files, it lets me call my compiler. If I come along here and actually go and create a new file. So let's do that. So if I go into my folder which has got this. Go into the source directory, and I go and make a file called, I don't know, Fred.java because why not? OK, so what's happened here, not a lot because I've done something wrong, I think. Well there it is, I'm just blind. So you'll notice that whilst I was editing that file, VS code just magically discovered that the file was there. I didn't edit it using VS code. It just popped up. How does VS Code know that that's happened? Is it psychic? What's it actually doing to figure that bit out? It has a watching function. So you're on the right, you're on the right track. What we really want to be able to do is have some part of the programme that looks for some kind of event, and that event could be pulling a new file, creating a new file, whether it happens within the programme or externally, doesn't quite matter, but we then want to be able to inform other parts of the programme about the change. Right? Because when we say it watch has something that watches the files for creation. That's not this toolbar, right, this, this thing here which has got my list of files in it, it's not watching anything. I might have part of ES code that says I'm gonna watch the file system and see if anything new appears, or maybe, maybe I delete a file. But that's not the user interface. So what we need is a way of informing parts of the programme that something has changed. So how might we go about that? Well, The observer pattern is what we want to use. So what's the observer pattern do? Well, we're gonna cut to the diagram. Blah blah blah blah blah. So by the way, the thing you'll notice about. This book is that it will go on with some rather strange example in this case of Weather Station. But eventually at the the nearer the end of the chapter, we'll actually show you the kind of canonical version of what we're looking at. So, The observer pattern is also known as the pub sub pattern, publish and subscribe. So what we have is a way of having, Something that's gonna accumulate lists of things that are interested in finding out if something's changed. And when a change happens, it will go and contact that class to inform it of the change. So again, when I was talking about VS code over here, I reckon I I mentioned that there'd be some little part of the programme that says I'm gonna watch the file system. But I need to then tell other parts of VS code that something's changed. In this case it'll be the, The thing here that lets me view the file tree, but that's not gonna be the only thing that's interested. But I don't want to have to go and tell every single object in the system that something's changed. Why wouldn't I just tell everything in the system that there's been a change? What, what would be wrong with doing it that way? What do you guys think? So I've got a system with a a million objects, some large programme, some large application. I got a million objects going. And something observes a small change somewhere. And then I go and inform every other object in the system about that change. What's wrong with this picture? You're You're wasting a lot of cycles, the programme would be very, very inefficient. It would be actually quite painful to use. So you only want to inform things that are interested. Hence it's pseudonym of Pub Sub. So, I'm gonna take this pair class and I'm gonna turn it into something that implements this pub sub idea. All right. Now What we really want to do. Is add the idea that we want to maintain a list of things that are interested, In learning when something's changed. So somewhere in here we need to implement that idea. So let's add an attribute to our class. We'll use a list to maintain it, but it could be, it could be any compound data structure. And I'm gonna start off by just using our old pal object. I'm gonna call it subscribers. Actually, I'm just gonna subs cos I don't want to type too much. So I'm gonna say create a new array list cos I'm gonna use array list for this and let's uh put in the. Necessary imports, just to make it happy. OK. OK, so we're gonna place to store the things that are interested when things change with my pair. We then want to be able to do something when things have changed. So, We need to define some kind of action that's gonna get called. So Let's think about the relationship here. In our example here, We have a thing that manages some bit of data. So in our Example here, it's our pair, so it's managing a uh some data, it's gonna have a pair of things put into it. And we're gonna have a bunch of other objects in the system that are interested in finding out if there's been a change to the subject. So these become observers. We might have another object somewhere in the system and it just doesn't care, so it's not part of the relationship. Now in order for this thing to be called out, we need a method that gets called into the observer objects. So you remember last week I talked about the notion of contract in a programme? This is very much along those lines. So when we're doing this observer pattern, we're saying we have a bunch of objects that are interested in being notified when a change occurs to a particular object, and that notification has to be done through some kind of method call. So I'm gonna call that method called shout. I'm gonna call it that just because, why not? There's nothing to the name itself, it's just the name that we've chosen. Oops, it's not what I wanted. Why is it doing that? OK. Now the other thing that we didn't finish off with this implementation of a pair last week or the week before, is being able to access the individual elements of a pair, so I'm gonna add that functionality. So I'm gonna add a. Method that returns the first of the pair, I'll just call it get first. And it's going to return Uh, what do we got here, X. We'll add a 2nd method. Called get seconds. Which returns the other part of the pair. So there are two Ah, I forgot the type. I'm always forgetting the type. Thank you. Ah OK. Alright. So let's say that the thing we want to do the informing is whenever somebody accesses, The first element of our pair. So we're gonna set this up so that the only time we're interested in having observers being informed is when the first part is accessed. So we need to put a method inside there. That calls back to the the the um. The subscribers. So we do an iteration. Over our list of subjects. And we call a method, which I said we're gonna call shout. Now so far we haven't defined that method, but the essence of what's going on here is to say that we're gonna modify our data storage so that it maintains a list of observers. And when we call the method that says give me back an element, the first element of my data, it's gonna go and talk to all the things that are interested and say, hey, I was called. So it invokes a a return call to other methods. To let them know the objects that have those methods. That this update has occurred. So, where's that shout method going to be deployed? Well, we could put it in a 3rd class, but I'm actually gonna pop it. Into our, A method Because, well, we've already got some some code here. Shall I get rid of all this junk. So we're gonna add an extra method. That we're just gonna call shout. And we'll just do a bit of an output here and say I observed. So in other words, it's the thing that's doing the observation. I'm gonna change this a little just so that we get rid of some of the complexity, I'm gonna make pear. PR equals new. OK Oops per inha. Uh OK Here what junk. All right. And I'm just gonna implement P.ge first here. Right, so We've now put the other side of that equation. So inside app.java we're gonna create a pair. I've gotten rid of all that point stuff cos it just adds too much complexity. We're just gonna simply use integer and char to keep things simple, and it's gonna call that method. Now without the observer pattern, it would simply just go and fetch the value, and indeed, it should, if we look at what pair is doing, it will return T and our our case T is an integer. So it probably should. Put something in here that says. First Of our I And then we can OK. You can get rid of all this junk as well. It's always good to get rid of stuff. OK. Now, we're still getting a complaint from Shout here. Why is that? Anybody tell me? At this point, we've put the essence of the idea in, we're gonna have a function that calls into our pair. It will do whatever it's primary purpose is, which is to return the pair. But we also want to have this side effect of it calling back to say that the observer, Is going to be informed. So we need to implement this using some kind of, Mechanism that says that the thing that we're calling back will definitely have this method. So what type of thing is S? We've said we're gonna maintain a list of objects. And the thing that we're gonna call back is supposed to have this method called shout. But S is a kind of capital O object. What methods does it have available to it? Does it have that method available? Clearly not. So, in order to make this work, I need to actually implement a little bit of extra infrastructure. And that's simply to use a couple of interfaces. So I'm gonna create an interface called, Excuse me. I'm gonna create an interface called Shoutable. So I can get my gooey to do what I want it to do. Thank you. I'm gonna just make that interface, and the interface only has to implement one method. Which is the shout method. And so then we can constrain. The list of observers, not to be any old at all, but only the things that implement our method. So we're gonna change that from object. Too shoutable OK. Yeah. Sorry? They Yeah, I haven't got to that bit yet. Just doing things one step at a time. OK. So, the type checker is now happy. Because we have chattable here. We have The shoutable here, but as you've just pointed out, my app, Is the thing that has this method, so we also need to tell the compiler, That it is one of these kinds of things. Right, so let's look at the dynamics of this. We have a now I've put two parts together here. We could have implemented this sharp somewhere else on a different object, but just for convenience we're putting it in the same place as the thing that actually creates the pair. So, In this context, our app, Is an observer, so it's the thing that's looking for changes in the subject. And our subject is our pair. So we're gonna go and create a pair. And then we're gonna call this get first method. And the get first method. Includes a block of code before doing its actual work, a block of code that goes through and says, I'm gonna look at all the things in my list. Of observers. I'm gonna go and tell them, hey, I've been called. So, so far we've kind of got the bolts of it. But it's not gonna really do what we want it to do yet. Because I get my output here. But what I really want to happen is every time I call that method, I also want to have the side effect of this, Method being called back. So I've kind of got the first part, but I need to register interest. So I need to make a few further changes. So in order to do that, I also need to make an extra little thing here on our pair. So I'm gonna add A method Then I'm gonna call subscribe. And the thing that's doing the the subscribing, the observer has to implement that interface. And all I'm gonna do is add that incoming thing. To my list. Now of course that means. Before I do anything else. I still need to add my app to the list. So back in app I'm gonna add in Some code that does that work. Now we're all in order for this to work, we actually need to make sure that we're not just relying on the static element of um, Our app, so we're gonna actually go and create, An instance of app. So that we now have something we can pass in. And then I'm gonna say, sorry. Do that afterwards Yeah, what's it unhappy about? Have I? Yes, thank you. That's a little bit better, thank you. All right. So, what have I done there? I've made sure that my app, which is my where my main method is, is no longer just a static thing. I still have a static main method. But remember that static methods are things that belong to the class, not to an object. So when that gets called into by Java, there is no object of type app. Because this belongs to the class. But I want To observe changes to my pair. So in order to do that, I need to actually pass in an actual object, not a class. So all I'm doing is making sure that I actually have an object. Of this type, And now adding that in. As an observer, so I'm saying I want to subscribe to changes that occur in that code, in that programme. OK, so we now have our working callback. Right. Now, this gives us the ability to do more than one of these. So I could go ahead And create Oops. More than one See if I can spell this right, probably not. And the important thing to note here is that by subscribing more than one object to it, All of those objects will become informed. With only one call into that method. So this list. Could end up with any number of objects in it, and all of them will be informed simply as a side effect of calling that get first method, yes. Uh, sorry, this is down the bottom here. So subscribe just simply says add me to your list of subscribers. Sorry, the subs is at the very top, it is just a list. Yep. So the key thing to note here, there's nothing very complicated really going on here, it's just saying I've got one object that, Calls into another object to say, hey, I want to know when something change, changes, so add me to your subscription list. And I've got another method, which explicitly says, if you call me, I'll go and call back a particular method to all the subscribers. But in order for this to work, we need to make sure that the method that we're calling, is something that is definitely implemented by the thing that is. Observing. So we just use an interface to achieve that end. Yeah. Now, if we're being complete about this. We should also make sure that the thing that's being observed, Also implements an interface. So I'm gonna add that in and I'm gonna get you to tell me why that there's a need to do this, cos this is clearly now working the way we want it to. I'm gonna add in Sharp publisher. Oops pub. We have to go and create And we're gonna say it's an interface. And we're gonna add in the. The subscribe method to this interface. OK. So just for the sake of completeness, I'm gonna run it and find that nothing has changed. So why do they feel the need to add that extra, Interface, and then to make sure. That my pair. Implemented that interface. What's the purpose of that? What do you guys think? Yeah. Precisely. So what we're doing is we're saying we have a little ecosystem here of things that implement this shoutable, Interface, And we want to be able to say that we have, A bunch of observers that observe a particular subject, and then there's a call back. But this kind of structure might occur in lots of different places in my codebase. And so I might have another thing that looks very much like this diagram, somewhere else in my code, but for a completely different unrelated part of my programme. So maybe I've got something that draws something on the screen, another thing that watches the network for incoming traffic. Do I want to mix those two models? No. So to ensure that that doesn't happen. We use our interfaces to actually constrain which things can observe a particular, Uh, observable class. OK, so we can see it didn't actually have to have it for it to compile and work, but in order to make sure that we don't inadvertently mix more than one of these when we have multiple different pub submodels and within our code base, we really should add in this publisher element. To our code.
