SPEAKER 0
So this uh coffee company, uh, the coffee company. Is selling coffees, obviously. And they've come up with this possible design for their ordering system. And this makes sense to us. We're in this UML-ish notation, uh, where at the top when we see um. When we see a square, we know we're talking about a class of some variety, when we see it italicised, we know we're dealing with an interface, so it's got empty methods in it. We know when we see the open triangle, we're talking about inheritance. So all these inherit from the one above. We know that the different sections, the top sections, the fields, the second sections, the methods. And we just leave out the fields if we don't need it. So this is telling us that we've got 4 classes that all inherit from some interface. And the interface has a single field which describes the, the, the drink, and then two methods, uh, one that just returns back that description, so it's probably a private field. And then another one that calculates the cost. And those are both empty in the interface because you can't calculate the cost of a drink with no properties. Um And then they extend from that. The 4 different types of coffee that they provide, and each of them will override the cost method. Now just judging by the look of this, I can probably see that wasn't an interface up there, it was probably an abstract class cause I don't have overrides forget description, and that's OK. Sure, OK, so they're using italics for abstract classes as well. Oh yeah, and they're using italics for the abstract method as well. I could barely see it there, but that cost is in italics there. So that's how they're telling you which one's uh abstract. That seems simple enough, seems smart enough, right? If I need an array list of drinks, I need to have a super class. I'm gonna go through my array list and I'm gonna call cost on each one and add them up, so I better be able to store all the possible drinks, so I need a super class. I better have cost available on that so I can call it on them all. Fine. Sounds good. But of course you know as well as I do, uh, that's not how drinks go. There's a bazillion different types of drinks out there, all with various different costs. Um, all the different things you can do to your coffee. Uh, mean that in reality they're gonna end up with thousands of these. Uh So that's not gonna work. So the decorator tries to solve this problem, but it's a little bit more than, uh, you might say it's just the problem of, of, uh, inheritance explosion, but a lot of the design patterns solve inheritance explosion. This one solves it in a particular context, they all solve it in a particular context. Um, in this context, we've got a lot of things that are very much like each other. But You can, uh, how can I put it? You can build them From the inside out. So if I, if I want to say that a. Von do the standard animal inheritance hierarchy. I got the, I put an animal on the top and I go, I got a cat, I got a dog, I got a bird, I got a. Um, duck, they definitely all relate to each other, and then I realise I'm gonna have bazillions of animals because there really are millions of animals in the world. So I end up with another one of these explosions. I don't turn to the decorator problem in that case because you can't make a duck from a bird. They're completely separate things. But over here, we got the parts that are building up. We're adding on top extra properties of each thing. As we go. So if my problem was that I had, I don't know, trying to think of it on the animal side of things, but if I had, you know, dog and small dog and trained dog and um. Dangerous dog, they might build on each other causes they might have a small, trained dangerous dog. And I might have a large, untrained, non-dangerous dog, they'll, you can build them like that. So you gotta be able to build for the decorator to to kick in. And that's the key to it, that's the key to what makes it work. Is it really, there's still only one underlying thing, but with the decorator, if I can take that underlying thing and expand upon its properties, Then I, I can use the decorator to avoid this class blowout. So they've got all the explanation inside da da da. So this is me skipping an explanation because I've given my variant. Um, So this is their alternative way of doing, this is one alternative way of doing it, right? Yeah, I've got to remind myself, this was the bad alternative way, right, yeah. So they're trying to show us one alternative way, which is that we don't inherit for all those properties, those are properties, we just put them on the on the um on the superclass. We can say yes, no, yes, no, yes, no, yes, no for all of those, um. Well then I'm gonna have to have gets and sets for them, but that's OK. Uh Where does this become a problem? This seems like a smart idea and it's it's certainly a better idea to start with. The main place that this falls down. Is this question here? Well, there's a couple of problems. So if I were to change the cost of one of those components, The logic in my class, all my subclasses all might have to change. Take account of the cost, cause all I've got in there is that it has the milk, not how much the milk costs, or it has soy, not how much soy costs. I also can't quite wrap them the way I might want because I can't exclude the fact that you don't put. Certain things on other things, right? Yeah, you don't put whipped cream on top of iced tea, apparently. Oh, that might sound nice. But the killer is what happens if I want to double up on some of these decorators, I just don't have that capability. Um, cos I've only got a field that just says, is it there or is it not there? So then you'll say, well, I can just change the field so that it says how many of these are there? And yeah, that might work, but the decorator's the alternative that is more flexible and better. So everything with the design pattern. It's not that it's the only way to do it. It's not that it's the best way to do it in every circumstance. It's that it's a smart way to do it that has a lot of applicability. Uh, one of the problems in studying design patterns though is that because we want to learn them individually and in isolation, we tend to see them in fairly contrived examples where maybe one of the other ones would be just fine. I do want you to see the alternative designs, and I want you to maybe agree that in the context of this one, potentially just doing it as fields is a better way to do it. Um, but I think in this case, one of the reasons I like this book is it does a good job of motivating. Um, The the examples they come up with are actually better in the design pattern. But I don't want to put you off from the idea that this solution might be an OK solution at times. We've now seen, we've now seen two different ways to model the same thing, one where we had a big class explosion, one where we used fields more, and the fields were just boolean in that one, and then maybe I say, oh, the fields could be numbers, and that's the third design. Um, and now we're gonna see a 4th design where we do the, the decorator. And so we're gonna convince ourselves and agree that the decorator is the best of these designs in the general case. And it's gonna show up in a lot of real world scenarios as well. Questions. OK. One of the challenges for you in this course is somehow internalising the code that you're looking at. Um, we see a lot of code, we see a lot of diagrams. Uh I guess I'm just reminding you, if Damien hasn't already, that. Understanding where you're starting from before you take the next step is important, so if I linger on something for a bit too long, it's because I'm giving you some time. If I go to the next thing, you're like I didn't understand the last thing, well, hang in there through the lecture, but that means go back and try and find an intuition for that earlier thing. And so people aren't asking me questions. About the intuitions of these things already, you might already be lost, and you should ask me because slowing down and helping you get that. First step, is more important, the, the textbook's there, we've got the full material up. If I don't cover everything in these 2 hours, it's not an issue. But it is an issue if you don't even understand what the hell that last design might be doing, and then you still try and understand the decorator, right? OK. So still no questions, anything? It's OK, I know it's hot. I like the guru conversations, but I won't, I won't go through them all. OK, so we're learning a new design principle at this point, and this is actually a really key part of the course, by the way, the design principles. Um, this design principle that we keep in mind is classes should be open for extension but closed for modification. So, more precisely what does that mean? Um, Working code is the most valuable thing in the software industry. Bug free working code is gold. Um So You should never have a system that encourages you to go in and make changes to working bug free code. Um, and classes are part of the system that supports that because you say, I've got working bugger free code in the super class. If I wanna add some functionality, cos I always wanna add functionality, I'm not going back in there. I'm leaving it. It's a sacred thing. I'm gonna extend it with a subclass and I'm gonna make my changes there. So there's always a trade-off there, right, because it's a little bit harder to extend something in a subclass than it is to just go into the original file and modify it. Certain things might be encapsulated, blah blah blah. But the principle is that that working code, working bug-free code is so valuable, you'll take a hit on some other things to keep that. And so that's the closed for modification idea here, that if the code is there and working, we shouldn't be touching it. But of course, uh, requirements change, programmes change. The thing I wanna do today is different to the thing I wanted to do yesterday. So I do have to somehow change my system and that's where we use the word extension instead. We say close it up to modification, but open it up to extension, I'm gonna use extension instead of modification. And where that kicks in over here. Is that under this design. If a new um So now I start selling syrups with my coffees, and I've got to put a syrup field in there for hazelnut naan, whatever the heck those syrups are, what are they, vanilla and hazelnut, I don't know, they've gone out of fashion, but every second person used to have hazelnut lattes, um. I've gotta come back in to my beverage. Super class and change that. And I've got to go back into each of my subclasses and change them. OK. Fields are. Particularly problematic when it comes to extension, because they tend to be private. Alright, so Well let's look for an alternative. Even if it's just to follow this design principle. Alright, the picture coming up. So another reminder of this UML-ish notation. So, uh, did Damien talk to you about UML? Shake not anything. Someone's gotta give me some indication. Never heard the word UML before. No one's heard the word UML before. That person has, that person hasn't. So I need a tiebreaker. It's alright, I'll talk a bit about UML. So UML just stands for the Unified modelling Language. It's a design language for us to draw things about object on code. And you'll have seen it all the time, you see you saw it just here, you're already reading it, but I'll just be precise about what we're talking about. Whoop, yeah. So UML is just a set of. I don't know, agreed. Rules we use when we draw things about our object oriented designs. That make the code into a diagram. Now the diagram never contains all the information from the code, it contains a summary, but it contains the most useful summary for us to try and get our head around the system. And so if you haven't done it yet, you should go write, make yourself UML diagrams for the the game you're making in workshops. Um, or UMLish is what I like to use. So when I say UML-ish, all I mean is some diagrammatic notation that makes sense to you and the person you're dealing with, but mostly just you. Come up with some diagram of your system that helps you understand it. From here on in in your programming, none of the systems are gonna make sense unless you've got both the code and the diagram and an internal representation in your head. And generally the diagram helps convert between the two. So sit down, do yourself some diagram, any diagram of that, that workshop example, but in UML-ish, we tend to say we we put classes in squares. And as I showed you before, we do italics for abstract things and we do the open pointy brackets for inheritance. We tend to put objects, remembering that an object is very different from a class. They have all the same fields, and they have access to all the same methods, but they're very different things. Objects tend to be round, not square. And you never put an inheritance with an object because objects never inherit from anything. Objects just are, they just have references to other objects, right? Uh, so down here that's what they're doing. They're very usefully using a circle to say I'm dealing with an object here. Right, this is not the dark roast class. This is some object I built from the dark roast class, class. And because I built it from the Dark Rose class, it's got a cost method that I can call. Mhm. So the approach with the decorator is you say, if I want to add some, Characteristic to this, I actually do it by incorporating this object into some other object that's got the extra characteristic. So the base object being the dark roast might be incorporated into another object called mocha, which adds a bit more cost or maybe reduces cost, I don't know. It should reduce cost. Chocolate's cheaper than coffee. No, they're doing both, so now you've gotta add cost. Um, Yep. This one does because they're still using the same kind of dark roast they showed up above, but we're actually just thinking conceptually about, If we've got objects in our system. How can we add functionality to objects separately to inheritance? One way is to say, I've got a dark roast object, I've got a mocker object, I'm gonna kind of conceptually have that dark roast object inside the mocha one. And when I ask for the cost on that mocker object. It'll first go over. To the other one and say what's your cost, and then add a little bit more to it before it returns it. So they've drawn them as being inside each other, but of course objects are never inside each other. They really have to go like this. Now I gotta switch over for the video people. I'm gonna forget to do this sometimes, so please catch me out. Um, Objects can't actually be like that. Objects have to be like. Objects can only have fields that relate to other objects. So what's this field gonna be called, I don't know, maybe it's gonna be called the inner. Or something? But once I've got that set up, once I've got a, so that's gonna look something like. Yeah, so maybe I'll just do a little bit of code here to help you see what this would actually look like in code, cos I think that's, that's useful. So completely ignoring any inheritance stuff, let's just think about what code we write to make this a reality in Java. We certainly have to have a class. Dark roast Actually I'm gonna do this on the where I can type, cos that'll be easier for you to read. Oh, not that one, always does that. Quit Oh, come on. You don't need to worry about the rest of this. OK. So to do that, we're definitely gonna need a class. Dark roast And we're gonna need a class. OK, right. And the way they joined, the only way you can ever join compose two objects is by having a field in one that references the other. Yeah So this is really a code representation of those two circles being within each other. And of course to make that actually work, I'd need a public. Moka OK, that's just a that's just to set up the relationship, and then the only other thing that might be needed for the example they've got here is maybe a, And what I want to say is that it's gonna be the inner. In a cost plus an extra $1 80s, which means in a better I have a cost method, so I put one in. OK. And so that code does achieve that thing, it achieves the idea of one object being kind of inside another, but really it's composed with the other one. That's what we mean by composition. At this point, you've been wondering what the heck's composition over inheritance. It's precisely what it means. Moka composes with a dark roast. It doesn't inherit from a dark roast. Cool. And then the same composition gets access to the methods of the other thing simply because every object's got access to all the public methods of the other thing. Um, Just doesn't automatically get them through inheritance. Questions? OK, so I mean this is the heart of the decorator. It's just this. It's just putting one object inside another and going, cool, I'm gonna, I'm gonna call its methods and add a bit. You're like, alright, we're done, move on. Well, everything from here. Is about getting through the type system of a statically typed language. And so a reminder in case Damien didn't tell you, statically typed languages dominate the world, there's only one big language that's not, well, OK, so in the big languages you've got statically typed languages, then you've got JavaScript and Python. Python does a bit of statically typed stuff. JavaScript doesn't do any, but unless you're planning to be Python slash JavaScript developer, you're gonna play in the statically typed world, planning to be that forever. Um, anyway, so the Everything from here is just recognising that that's what we wanna do and then jamming it through the type system. Because where the type system's gonna fall down here is that I've had to specifically link it to dark roast to make that code work. But I don't really want that. I want any beverage to be able to go inside the other beverages. So I wanna change dark roast to beverage there. And that means I need a little bit of inheritance, so I can have that super class and have the subclasses below. So maybe I'll make that change now. So we need at least the tiniest superclass. And all it's gonna have in it is the cost, right? And then I can make this one extend. Beverage, and once I've done that. I don't have to put dark roast specifically in here, I can put any beverage. And now I can extend any other beverage. And that'll work. I got that through the type system. Alright, so that's definitely a win. Yeah. I will if I want to go to the next step, you're right. But for this particular part I don't have to. OK, so the next part of the diagram shows, hey, wouldn't it be great? If we could have, I mean, for this design to work, I want to put more things inside other things. OK, cool. So if I go back over to my code and create that. I'm doing And I'm just gonna do the same trick, right? Except it's. And it costs $3.10 Um, but this doesn't quite get me what I need because at this point I can only put whip around a dark roast, nothing else. Um, the only secret to unlocking that is the suggestion we just had then, which was, I don't, not just dark roast should extend beverage, all these should extend beverage. Then they can all go inside each other. And we get this infinite nesting however we want. I should do the same for weep as well. So now I can just build up by just putting an existing beverage into another one. Constructing one, passing in the one that goes inside it, we're done. And as long as some of them sit at the bottom and don't need any other beverages inside them. The construction works out just fine. And we've even got That built in, because you can't make a whip or a mocha without some other beverage underneath it. Because just asking for a whip or a mocker makes no sense. But I can ask for a dark roast without asking for anything else. And so if I was to build a drink with this, we would have to have something inside it. That could be dark roast and then nothing else, or it could be mocha, and then that would have to have something else inside it which would have to be a dark roast, that's all I've got in my system right now. And that's the um decorator pen, we've just built it up. OK, let's get back. You want a picture this? Too bad, watch the recording. That's what the recording's for. Why would we choose to use an abstract class over an interface? In this case, um, I don't think I've got a particular reason, so that's a general question, why would I choose to use an abstract class over an interface? The answer is, Comes down to Java, in most languages you would just use an abstract class cause those interfaces are the same. But in Java you turn to interfaces when you're worried about multiple inheritance, and none of our contrived examples do that. So then the extra answer is, if there's no behaviour in the abstract class, you might as well make it an interface just for the extra flexibility. Yep. OK, so we actually didn't quite get to this diagram, but um we've almost got this diagram. So here component was our beverage. Concrete component was our dark roast. We didn't actually put a decorator in the middle. We, but we did have concrete decorator. A and B Which inherited from component. So in the real decorator pattern, you just add one more in between to make it clear. Um, that It's only the decorator that can have another component inside it. It's not the concrete component that can have another component inside it. And then anything that's a decorator will definitely get that component inside it. So, um. You'll be able to do the course. And of course the method A and method B are up there in component, which means they have to be in all of these below. Um, but method A and B are the simple versions over on the concrete component, and over here, they're almost certainly, almost certainly. Call the concrete component, whichever one's inside, and then adds something to it or subtracts something to it or modifies it in some way. Cool. Done. Let's decorator. We'll move on now, cos we've got more to get through. OK, next. Alright, now let's do questions on decorator before I scrape along. So don't forget to go read that textbook top to bottom, it's very good. I got through all three chapters on my train ride this morning and I live pretty close, so it's not an onerous requirement. Although I do already know the material, but you get my point. Yep. Which content? This textbook So you go to the Macquarie library and you type in headfirst design patterns and you follow the links, and it asks you to log in with your one ID at some point, and you do that and then you've got access to it. Cool. There's a copy of the PDF or an explanation on how to do it? Here you go, isn't Damien lovely? Go. There you go, there's a PDF in the unit information. OK, next we are doing. State Go away, that's what. No scroll over heat one. Jesus. Why doesn't the contents page work? That's the O'Reilly one. That's the OK, you did the strategy pattern already, they talk about in the book about strategy and state looking the same, they're being a little bit defensive there, um. But I do understand why. State pattern um allows you to swap out one of the methods of your object at runtime. Correct. Yes, that's really, are you remembering? We did state last week, right? Sorry, not state, we did strategy last week. Strategy last week, I got one nod, another nod good. And the point of strategy was that instead of setting an object, sorry, instead of setting a method in your in your object that was always the same method and you inherited and you changed the method in the in the subclass, you, you put a separate object in there that just did that method for you. And you delegated to it. And that meant that you could always swap that out at runtime, you can always swap object relationships at runtime. You can't swap inheritance at high at run time. So we were swapping out one of our methods at runtime, and that method was called strategy. What happens with the stay pattern is we do kind of something similar. But we swap it out amongst a small subset of possibilities. And then the way they swap out is is carefully organised. So that was maths 1007, was it just before me, not 2007. 1007, yeah, and you guys don't all have to do 2007 anyway. They don't think they do state machines in math 1007, do they? No Yeah, but state machines are in discrete maths, but I think it's in the 2nd year discrete maths. Finite state automatons. Um, well, so we'll do a quick, a quick review of state machines. Um, Uh, I don't know. I'll try and make up a simple one, but. State machines It's not something I was all ready to teach. So state machines are exceptionally useful construct for everybody in the entire world, but also especially programmers. They give the example here of a gumball machine that goes through different states. But most things in the real world can be thought of as going through a set of states. And if you choose to model them via a state machine, you get a lot of traction on the problem. You understand the problem much better and you can work with it much better. State machines, we also know exactly how to turn state machines into computer programmes, so once you've written something out as a state machine, you almost automatically know how to get a programme from it. And that's super valuable. So the state machine for me this morning might have been. Um, Sleep These are various states I could be in. OK. So let's pretend these are all my states for today. You can see the moat, yep. And so when I started this morning, I was asleep and then I woke up. And then if I start a hungry thirsty and I have my tea in the morning. I go to just Hungary. Who And if I start from hungry and I just have breakfast, I go to just thirsty. And if I'm hungry and I have tea, I go, no, if I'm thirsty and I have tea. Oh, I gotta have a normal state here. Otherwise I'm just bouncing between. Um, hungry and thirsty. Alright. So if I'm thirsty and I have tea, I'm good. If I'm hungry and I eat, I'm good. And then Every half an hour, I go back to both. Let's make it one hour. Alright, so there's a just a state diagram. So, whatever, that's what a state diagram looks like. It just transitions between different states on different actions, and you can think up a million examples. Uh, questions, thoughts? Yeah, so it obviously only has capsulates a part of what it means to be me, but it's the most important part. Um, so if your problem is modelled as a state machine. Then you should model it as a state machine. Don't start from scratch and write a programme. But a million people do. Um, if I asked, if I just gave someone who'd never learned state diagrams before that picture and said go write a programme for it, there's 100 ways they might do it, and they'd all be wrong. And the one right way is to do it, the state diagram way. Here they show us a couple of less wrong ways. And they do it for the gumball machine. So the gumball machine has different set of states. The gumball machine takes no coins or it has a coin. Um, it can have sold, uh, gumball or it can be out of gumballs, and then there are transitions between those based on the various actions, which hopefully they show us the diagram for, maybe not. No, they don't So I don't know that's disappointing. They just show us the code. OK, so the way they go about doing this state machine is they gather up, they make a single gumball class. And it has all these different states that it can be in. And they just store those as numbers. So it's current state is some number and if it's number 0 that means sold out, if it's number 1, it means quarter. Uh, what the actual numbers are don't, doesn't matter, it just matters that you've got a unique value for each one. And then in the gumball system. You have to have a function for each of the actions that might take place on that. So you can, one of the things you can do to a gumball machine is insert a quarter. One of the things you can do is turn the handle. One of the things you can do is kick it because it hasn't given you your gumball. So each of those has to be a method. So if you're writing up the insert quarter method, you have to change what the insert quarter method does depending on which state you're in. On my example, I'd be writing a method for, well, that's, that's simplified a little bit. Just a tiny bit. The different transitions I've got are wake up, eat, tea and wait an hour. So I'd have to write a method for each of those. But the method for eat has to operate differently depending on which state I'm in. If I'm in the state of a sleep, I have to choke and die. If I'm in the state of thirsty. It would actually just send me straight back to the same state. So there's me thinking of another one. But if I'm in the state of hungry, blah blah blah. OK, so then I've gotta die over here if I eat. And this is actually one of the ways that state machines can be useful, uh, because they can lay out your. Your problem for you in a way that makes you think about everything. So I got if I got a method for this it different things on different um states and so that's why the. The method here has to go through, if I'm in this state, do this, if I'm in this state, do this, if I'm in this state, do this. Fine, there you go, that's a state machine. And I'll have that for insert quarter, I'll have that for the other methods. They've got an insert method, they got eject the quarter method, they gotta turn the crank method, and as you can see they've got the if statements for all the different states. So what's wrong with this d, what's wrong with this model? Nothing really, this is actually not a bad definition of a state machine, it's how you do it in a language that didn't have inheritance and classes. An object only language anyway, in a functional language you'd do it on the other. I So the problem they bring up here is, you know, what happens if we want to introduce a new state into this particular system. Well, Uh, whatever the new state is, it's gonna have to go up the top and get a new number. And I'm gonna have to go through every single one of these methods and add what that new state does. OK, so that's bad news from a closed for modification point of view. I'd love to be able to take an existing gumball machine. And Your code and not change it to make a gumball machine that I don't know, has a new state. The one they use in the book is, um, the state for giving a a special prize. It doesn't just, sometimes it just dispenses 1, sometimes it dispenses 2, so that brings in the new state. It'd be great to be able to say, oh, just inherit from that existing gumbow machine and add this new state, and here's what to do just for this new state. But I can't possibly do that here because if I, if I inherit from this class and add a new state, none of its methods work anymore. There's a new state in there that's not being checked for in the existing code. I can't extend that code with inheritance. I can only extend that code with modification, bad news. So the idea of the state diagram is that it just flips it of the state pattern, it just flips that design and says instead of having methods for every action. have Objects for every state. Then they go through their change request and make you do a puzzle. And show how that's problematic. Which is all the stuff I just described. So in that original design, we had a field for each state. And the method for each transition. Under the new design, they're going to have an object for each state. And then what's each transition gonna be? Let's find out. Once we do the object for each state, we'll see whether. Each transition has to appear. We're going from just a simple field for a state, number to an entire object for a state. So what's the steak gonna look like? Huh? Probably Uh, the state is going to have each of those methods in there because no matter what state I'm in, I still need to execute those methods, those actions. So how is this different? I mean, before I had numbers for fields and methods for. Transitions. Now I've got an object for a field and methods for transitions. Can anyone suggest what's gonna be different, yeah? Yeah, so I'm gonna, the answer was, cos I can add another object and have all those patterns already. Uh, yes, kind of. The difference here, I, I think you, you got the right answer, but the key to the difference is that before I had a single method for each action. Now I've got a whole tonne distributed across my states. So there's not just a single insert quarter method, there's the insert quarter method that runs for that state and the insert quarter method that runs. So I've broken up my insert quarter method from 1 to 4. And they're just gonna do their job, not anyone else's job, and that's what allows me to add a new state in cos it doesn't have to worry about anyone else's job, it's just doing the state of the, the job of transitioning when I'm in that state, not the job of transitioning when I'm in any other state, which is what my original, Insert what I had to do, it had to know what to do in every possible state. OK, so we're moving, we're moving the logic of those methods out of the main gumball class and into each of the subclasses so it can be split up. OK, so these aren't fields anymore, they're objects. So, This is what one of those states might look like, as code. The key, the state, here's the first big difference between the state and the strategy. Normally when you do the strategy, the strategy itself doesn't need to know anything about the object it's coming from. Well, it doesn't necessarily have to. You can do a strategy separately, but here you really do have to know about the object you're coming from. Because there's a the the the split of responsibilities is not perfect here. There's something else I want you to realise with design patterns, we aim for coherence and, Coupling, low coupling, high coherence, right, which is when. High coherence means the job that's being done is being done in one place. And the low coupling means two things don't really have to know that much about each other. We've got some coupling here because the gumball machine needs to know about state and the state needs to know about gumball machine. That's the kind of coupling that we would normally try to avoid, unavoidable here, and we work around it. So, you have to build, when you build one of these states, you better tell it what gumball machine it's in. And then, um, The the transition methods just have to do the job of the transition in that state. And one other thing, They have to transition the whole system over to the next state. Um, because most of these actions went from one state to another. When I was thirsty and I ate, I stayed in the same state, but when I was hungry and I ate, I moved to a different state. So it does its job, which was just to output something and then transitions to the next state. And this is where you can see why it has to have access to the gumball machine, because it has to reach back into the gumball machine and say your state is no longer the state it was before, it's now this new state. So that makes it feel a little bit like the tentacles are going everywhere, but let me explain why not. Back to my diagram. Under this design, If I'm in hungry thirsty. I'm implementing two methods, the eat method and the drink method. And when I implement the ET method, I have to not just do my action, but I have to transition to the thirsty state. And when I implement my hungry thirsty, I have to transition to the hungry state. This means that hungry, thirsty needs to know about all these things. Yeah. Um, but if I add state elsewhere. Can all be done independently. I've isolated that little area of the state diagram, yes, there is still some interdependence. Someone has to know about something, but it's isolated, whereas before, hungry, thirsty had to know about every other state. Because that one method had to have every state in it. Yep. Mhm. Thank I didn't put that in my diagram, but maybe if we just wait. I mean, most of these Wait, 16 hours. Maybe. I'm just making up an example. Yeah. Um, but that's also an interesting example, right, cos maybe I can't transition if I'm hungry or thirsty into sleep. I've got to actually get to good first before I can transition to sleep. Yes. Yes, you're right, there's a bunch of transitions in here that need to be there to make this make sense. I was just trying to demonstrate what a state diagram, what the states and the transitions look like, and so that we could have a language for states and transitions because otherwise nothing makes sense for the state pattern. Maybe if anyone wants to do a complete mat. Eating and sleeping state diagram and submit it to the forums, I'll take a look and tell you how accurate it is. OK, well that's very cool, and now if I added a new state. I mean if that state interacted with the no quarter state, I might still have to adjust the no quarter state, but I can, it's just that part, it's not the whole gumball machine that's being modified. But for a bunch of other states, I wouldn't have to adjust anything. So you can see here that the The fields turn into objects, they go from numbers to objects. Um, and then the existing state is just still one of those. And then here's the full definition. You have to, you have to create each of those states when you construct it. Um, and in this case there's a bit of logic about whether which state you go into. And that can be kept in the gumball machine. You can split the logic across the states and the original class as wherever they fit best. The book has a reasonable discussion about how even that section of which state do I transition to next could be in the individual state or it could be back in the gumboll class, your choice as a design principle. Um, but so when we want to insert the quarter on the gumball machine, all we do is just say, ah, the state deals with that, so I'll call, I'll go to the state and I'll ask for its. Insert the quarter method and I'll do it. So this is precisely, who can tell me what word I'm gonna say goes for this, what am I doing here? When I put the state inside the gumball machine, I'm composing the state and the gumball machine. When I When the method call on this gumbo machine just causes me to method call on the state, that's called. Delegation. OK, composition is the one at the top where the fields are all set up, delegation is when a method called just calls another method. I'm delegating it to you, do what you want. So we delegate all of them. OK, then they show how they can add some extra states without having to mess up too much of the stuff. That's the sold state. Uh da da da da da, talking about things. I feel like I've covered all that, so I don't wanna cover it again, um. Let's think, should we just code up mine? I'm gonna code up mine, my little state thing from scratch. Just to show you in the same way I did before, I'm not writing actual valid Java code cause I'm just putting all my classes in one file, um, but just to kind of build it up to highlight the issues where, uh, cos, uh, blah, words going everywhere. Some of this is just the design we need, and some of this is just getting the type system to pay attention. In this case, we end up mostly with just the design we need. Let's go to the diagram, there's the diagram. So the diagram here says that the context which is the gumball machine. Has a bunch of methods. In this case they just put 1, request, but it could have 50. And it never bothers doing them, it just delegates it over to the state. So that's what a little dotted line means and a bit more UML by the way, um. We got the open triangles for inheritance. We've got the closed arrow for composition. What that means is that context has some field that is a state. And then the dotted lines it's a comment. It just says, hey, this request method probably is just exactly this. OK. So this differs in the diagram, the official diagram doesn't differ much from the strategy because it's, you could put strategy where it says state and concrete strategy down there and command in where it says handle and it would all be fine. The difference here is that normally the state actually has a dozen or more of those. There's more than one thing we do in each state, so there's heaps of handlers in there, not just one. There's also normally heaps of states on the context side. And then there's this little bit of coordination that has to happen because states transition from one to the another, so they've got to coordinate the transition of state back in the context. So they've given you the example of that. OK. So as they talk a lot about the difference being the intent, I think the difference is that this is written poorly. It should have handle 1, handle 2, handle 3, state 1, state 2, state 3, and then it's clearer what's going on. Alright, let's try and code up What was going on before? So, it was. Class Matt Has a bunch of states. OK And then we can construct a me, we can use the default constructor. And there's a bunch of actions I can do, so it was. Sorry, what was that? Yeah. Yes, I mean I haven't written it yet. Um, that'll, I'll have to make those states, I haven't made them yet, but because it starts with a capital letter, then it's a class and that's always an object is built from a class, yep. OK. Um, let's just call it tea cause it's always tea. That was the only trip we had oh we had wake up. Yeah Wake up, do do do do do do do. Can't get that out of my head now. OK, so if I want to do this by the state. Design. I've got to make each of these states, right? I gotta have class. Asleep And class of sleep has to implement all those possible methods because they're gonna be delegated to it. So asleep is gonna have all three. And if I eat when I sleep. Then I die. And if I drink when I sleep. I die And if I wake up when I sleep. I transitioned to OK, so even just with this little bit of structure. Uh, and I'm following the example of the book to go with this structure, but we might have come up with this ourselves as well from scratch, right? All I really want is this structure where um the state is keeping the things that I'm delegating to them. Um, but I'm gonna fill in the bits that I need to make this structure work. Cause sometimes I think when you read the, the code in the text, you can just see a bunch of code and you can agree that it all belongs there, but why did each part appear there? This is what I might do as a first design and everything else is me just making it work. So one thing I realised to make it work. Is that When I'm delegating, I need some fields to the delegation through. I haven't got one of them yet. So I better make one of those. OK. Um And then I can fill in all these as well. These are just gonna be mechanical. It's just gonna be Oops. And, you know, at the moment maybe I'm setting this just be the asleep class, but I very quickly realised this has to transition between all the different states, and so it can't just be, There's gonna have to be a super class to deal with them all. So I'm gonna have to put that super class in. So I better make one of those. And then the next thing I realise is that because current state is typed as a state. Current state.E will only work if the ET method is a method of the super class. So I've gotta make sure it's in the super class. So now I've gotta put all 3 in there. Oops. Killed it. But in the superclass, I don't know what to put them, so I'm gonna leave them abstract. But at least now the compiler will accept those, right? So now this is an abstract class. And these are abstract methods. And now if I'm a good Java programme, I probably realise I'm overriding here. So I Put my override keywords in. Have you been doing override keywords, yeah? I just made this up. Yeah. Oh no, so this is. Like the VS code window I opened is the VS code window I was doing my Co 3000 preparation in this morning. So, don't worry about any of the other stuff. Um, have you done nod or shake, have you done override keyword yet? Yes, we're choosing to use override, it's not a keyword, it's a tag. OK, so we're gonna override all these. Because we're good Java programmers. Right, so can you see how much I had to add just to get the machinery working? The actual conceptual design from an object point of view was quite simple. And then the superclass had to be in there to make it work, it had to be an abstract superclass to make it work. I had to have a bunch of abstract methods to make it work. I had to override them to make it work. Um, and there's one more thing I've got to do to make it work. Um, so each of these has to transition to the next state. The only place where the state is being stored is right here back in the math class. There's no way for me inside this class to transition the math class. To one of its new states. So I have to connect those two, so that this state can choose which of the next states to go to. I've actually got a couple of options here. Should I explore the options? No, we'll move on to iterator. There's a few different ways you can design this uh transition. No, I'm gonna show you 2 ways, 2 ways. So I certainly need access to the mat class, so I better put a constructor in here. Well, actually, let's put it up in the abstract class because it's gonna be the same every time. OK, so now I've got oops, now I've got that bit. Uh, connected The state will store that field, yep. I do, down there. Yeah. No, you're right. No, questions are good. um. So, I've got a field storing that and then I pass it in the constructor. You should always just have this patent in mind, if there's a field, I'd probably pass it in the constructor. But I'm actually showing you an example down here where I don't. I got 5 fields and I haven't filled them in yet. With the constructor? So let's do the, I didn't put the die state in, so let's do that. Um, I'm gonna show you an alternative. I like this, what's wrong with this design, why didn't the book do it? I don't know, let's do it and then we'll leave it as a forum post to work out why the book didn't do this design. I'm gonna transition to death. So the way I do that is I go. Origin Dot current state. Equals new Dire state. And that causes this variable back on the original one. To be updated to no longer having a sleep object in it, instead to have a die object in it, which I haven't written yet, but I can make one of those pretty simply. By saying OK, but again, now I gotta fill in all those knowing methods, da da da da da. So I like that design. The book doesn't choose that one, and if I do that design actually I don't need any of these. I don't have to put the states up there. Um Let's have a look at what the book does slightly, and there's bound to be a problem with it that I just can't think of on the fly, um, but that does transit, well, one problem is that it's um, Accessing the field directly, I should probably do a set current state, but I'm not a getter and setter kind of guy. Damien talk to you about getters and setters? Not the shakes. OK, so when you did comp 1010, getters and setters were good or bad? Good. Should you ever give access to your fields directly or should you write getters and setters? Who thinks you give access directly? You think she write get and setters? Good, you were taught well. I have the completely opposite point of view. That one's up for grabs in the programming world and Damien and I are not getters and setters guys. Um, if you're gonna get and set the field anyway, just bloody access the field. Doesn't matter. Um, but yeah, there are reasons to do getters incentives, so. Uh, we might think to ourselves, oh, I shouldn't access the field directly, I should get in set, but I'm not one of those guys. OK, um, Well, I think that's that. I, I've I've kind of built up that example now. Um, I'll jump back over to the book to show the difference of what they do. Is it in this code here? Where'd the code go? Yeah So the difference of what they did is that instead of allowing individual state objects to build new state objects, That would eventually be passed around and blah blah blah. All of the state objects were owned by the gumball machine. So all the possible states I might go to were fields of the gumball machine. Up the top there. And when the gumball machine was constructed, new versions of every one of them was made. And so it wasn't the job of the states to build the next state that we're gonna go to, it was the job of the state just to get the next state that we were going to, it was already there in the gum bowl. Machine and so you can see that here in, This example They're using the setter like they should. But they're not building a brand new court estate, they're just using the one that was already stored in the field. In the um In the gumbo machine, and that's made me think of one of the reasons that my design might be problematic. Which is that if those states need to store some field that persists across different state transitions, my one will break because I keep building new states and their one will work because the states are persistent. OK. Alright. Any more questions, any questions on that? He's Uh, ah. So does it have any effect memory wise building new states versus keeping them in memory? Um, in Java, no, because it's got the garbage collection, so as soon as the old state is disconnected, the garbage collector will grab it at first opportunity. Um, and Right, yeah, so. The only thing it does is put a bit more work on your garbage collector. But that's not normally a problem. Yeah. OK. So we understand that Java does garbage collection. I'm using words that shake your head if you don't, you do. Everyone knows what that means, good. But it is a good question, like you have to actually think to yourself, When I When I made this new object, did the old one actually lose all of its references? Was there anywhere else in my programme hanging on to a reference to that object? And in this example, certainly not. There's only one place where it could be. Um, but these references tend to proliferate. Um, and so I would say probably that their design is safer from that point of view, cause otherwise I might end up with various. states Yeah, hang on. OK. Good question, lots of good questions. You guys are good. In a time? Alright, let's quickly get through the iterator. It's a lot in one day, isn't it? One reason it's a lot in one day is because I think we're just doing 2 weeks on patterns this week or this year, where we used to do 3 or 4, so we can spend some more time on concurrency, but that might still be up in the air now Damo's gone down crook, and we're gonna have to adjust a few things, we'll see what happens. You know, flexible. Like the leaves in the wind. Next, iterator. The interact uh the iterator is actually a conceptually quite an easy one because you've been using them, well, observer, no, not that one. Because you've been using them all along. You're very good with containers by now. You probably haven't done a lot of examples where one object was inside another one. You probably haven't done a lot of examples where a method was actually sent off and delegated to a completely different. Um, object and you probably haven't done, uh, state machines, so these are all new concepts, but containers, you've done them, you had a unit on them, that's 10:10. And then you had, uh, you did, is it 2010 where you do the trees and all that with yeah, more containers. Collection. So the example they give in the book. Is that there's two part two companies merging, um, one's storing all of its items in an array list and another one's storing all of its items in an array, and they don't want to change that. Again, you're thinking of closed for extension, sorry closed for modification, if I've got existing array list code that's working, I don't want to go in and go and change all the array lists to arrays. Alternately, I don't want to go back into the other one and change all the arrays to array lists. And so the iterator pattern tries to solve the problem of. Viewing different collections through the same lens. That's all it does. You should really just think of iterator like some nice super class I could give or interface I could give to all of my collection classes, my array lists, my hashes, my dictionaries, my arrays, my vectors, my link lists. That had the methods that Well just 3 or 4 methods, I think 2 or 3 might even do the job. To allow me to do basic interactions with all those collections. Um, and not have to worry about which one they've actually got. So iterators weren't so obvious that they existed in Java from the start, they came in in. Java 16 or 14 something, long time ago, but. Just show you the example of the code we're trying to generalise. Where's it gone? That's the line-up code, that's the wind-up code, where's the real code? Yeah. So they've got 2 different collections, one of which is being stored in an array list, another one's being stored in an array. So breakfast items is being stored in an array list. And lunch items is being stored in an array. And you can see there are some subtle differences to how you have to iterate through them. First one you have to call dot size, second one you have to call dot length. To get into it with the first one, you have to call.get. Um, and on the second one you have to call. Um, the square bracket notation to get in. But that's the only difference. It would be nice if we could write a single. Piece of code to do this, it is kind of silly that they have different interfaces at all. Is it silly? It's not silly that they have different interfaces causes deep down they're doing a lot more than just letting you go from the start to the end and read an item out. Um, array lists let you insert things in various places, they grow and shrink as they need to, arrays are always the same size. Arrays give you fast access to any element. So they are different things, that's why they have different interfaces. But so much of the time. All we ever want to do is go from start to the finish and read every item in a collection. That that particular job, start to the finish, read every item, should be the same across all of them, that's what the iterator is. It just does, doesn't do anything else than what a collection do, doesn't do insertion, sometimes they don't do deletion. They don't guarantee fast access, they don't even tell you what order they're doing it in. So when I said start to the finish, I didn't really mean that. I just mean from just go through every element in this collection and show it to me once. So that's what these loops do, and so that means you just need to get yourself a kind of. Universal size and a universal get, and we'll be good to go, right? And yeah, cool, so the iterator must be a universal size and a universal get. Oh well, it's not. The iterator Is a universal has next and a universal next. Um, for reasons. I'll just remind, I'll put on my little screen to. So we said that we saw the things we saw over and over were. Size and well we had a size and we had a dot length. And we had to get And we had a These are the two things we thought we were going to generalise. But Uh, it's hard to motivate why, and the book doesn't even bother trying. um. It's hard to motivate why the iterator chooses a different set of basic primitives, but it does. There are reasons for it. The main reason is that um this forces you into an ordering, and the iterator just doesn't care about ordering. Um So instead of those ones, the iterator says, well I'm gonna give you these ones, do you reckon you can get the job done? I'm gonna give you has next. Which returned the bullion And I'm gonna give you. Get next. Uh, and so I just put that in. Uh, generics there because get next, it depends what the collection holds as to what the, the collection gives back when you ask for a next. And so we can't ride a for loop with something like that, but we can ride a Y loop. And we know wild lips are just as good as 4 loops, so if we have this style, we won't be able to write 4 in blah blah blah, but we'll be able to write. While Collection. As next Do something Well, in fact, the get next goes first, we go, um. Object equals. Collection. get next. And then we do whatever the rest we need to do in our loop. OK, so we've convinced ourselves that those primitives are just fine. They might not be the ones we were expecting, but they'll get the job done. They'll get the job done as long as we're not trying to. Access in the middle of something, like we would do with a rays. As long as we're not trying to modify. As long as we're just, I just need to visit everything one at a time. OK. Anyone think of advantages to just having such a small set of primitives? Being our iterator. Yeah. Well, it's easy to read, yeah, it's a nice simple um interface. Another one, you should think about your, well, you've done heaps, right? Yeah, heaps in 2010? Yeah, so heaps don't necessarily store things in the same order you'll visit them, lowest to highest or whatever. So as an example, a heap is a collection. It's nice just to let the heap look after which order it gives you things in, rather than you saying, hey heap, what's element number 6? Um, you just say just give me all the elements one by one. And I'll do something. So it's more general, it works on more types of collections. Uh, and it's simple and that works nicely. That's it. That's the iterator. That's easy, right? There's one extra subtlety that goes with the iterator, which is that, I've been talking about the iterator as if it was a super class for all collections. But it's not. The iterator is a field. That every collection can choose to have. So you can say to an array, give me your iterator. And then I can use that to loop through you. You don't just say, oh you are an iterator so I'll be able to use these methods to loop through you. So the iterator is a separate object. Owned by the collection that it gives to you. When it wants to let you access in that way, yep. Yeah, so the question was is iterator defined, so I don't need to do this, yes, that's right, iterator is defined in Java. In the book they do create their own iterator just to show you. How to do it, and because the Java, as always with these things, the Java definition is not exactly the same as the theoretical definition. The Java iterator does let you remove from inside uh an iterator, which is generally a bad idea. Um, so you actually go to the collection, you say create an iterator, give me an iterator, and then I'll use that iterator in the loop. And I'll call the haznis, not on the original array, but on the iterator, and I'll call the next, not on the original array, but on the iterator. So how do these, what are these iterators gonna look like? Um, your brain should be melting a little bit now cause you're like, hang on, I, if I was the array I could iterate through the array, but if I'm an object that came from the array, how can I iterate through the array? Let's make one. So iterator has an interface, it's got those two entries. Here's what an iterator looks like. The iterator needs to be given a copy of all the items. That's the key to it, being able to work over the array. It gets the whole way. This collection, in this case, the menus, um, the menu is much more than just a collection of menu items, it's got a bunch of other methods, but the menu items are the things that need looping over, so it, uh, it gets access to those in its constructor, and now it's got everything it needs to do its job. So if I ask for, I'm gonna have to keep a position internally, but if you ask for the has next, I'm just gonna check that I'm not at the end. And if you ask for the next, I'm just gonna return this item and update my position. Good, that's that's what an iterator would look like for an array. And when I need to do an iterator for an array list. Did I put that did I put that here as well? No. It looks very similar, but the iterator for the array list has to put, An array list of menu items, it still has a position. Um, and it uses the different syntax down there for square brackets and the different syntax down here for the length. But otherwise it does the same thing. So now you've got something that's actually quite powerful because any collection, no matter how, even if it's more than just an array list or a hash or a dictionary, it's, Some big conglomerate, like, it's the object representing your entire company and you say, hey, give me the iterator for all of my staff. And you just get back an iterator that will just go through every staff member. You can ask that. Give me the iterator that goes through all my sales, and you get back an iterator that just goes through all the sales. Um, it's a really powerful design. Because you can You can not just iterate over things in the same way, you can iterate over particular bits of things in the same way, just by asking for that iterator instead of the, the, the whole iterator. The next interesting thing to say is that when you get into the Java land, Notice how oop, down here, so I scroll around a lot and I apologise if that is a bit dis. Notice that to use the iterator there, line, the 3rd line there, we've got dinner menu.create iterator. This is all part of the pattern. If you're doing the pattern by scratch, not a problem. Um, but if you're Java, the Java writers, and you're like, well, we're gonna start using iterators now, so a bunch of people are gonna come along and, and go array list.create iterator or array.create iterator or hash.create iterator. How in Java do you make sure that that gets past the type system? They, all those have to, there has to be some interface that tells you which classes can have the create iterator called on it. And so that's another interface in Java called Iterable. So iterable tells you which things you can get an iterator from. iterator tells you how an iterator actually works. And interestingly, arrays in Java are not iterable. For reasons Mostly to do with generics. Actually 100% to do with generics. So let's look at the pattern. Well that's on their example, do they have the general one or are they just done with their example? Again with the waitress. Heterator pattern, cool. So the pattern diagram in general looks like this. Client, which is a word you'll see quite a bit in the patterns, just means something that's not involved in the pattern. It's the code that's using the pattern. I have to put it in the in the diagram cos otherwise the diagram can't make sense. Uh, cause just like I said, a ray list over here might be the aggregate. Um And I could have I could, I could do subtypes of that, maybe, maybe not. Whatever, I've got a bunch of different aggregates and they're not even related really to the iterators. Uh, yeah, they are related, but. Yeah, so the diagram it's a bit funny. That's why the client gets put in the middle. Let me just stop and reconsider the explanation. OK. So The aggregate is the array list or the array or whatever. It's got that single method on it called create iterator. In Javaland. The interface aggregate is actually called iterable. And so Lists, array lists, hashes, dictionaries, heaps, they're all subtypes of iterable, so they've all got the create iterator on them. When you call the create iterator on them. They, they have to know exactly which concrete iterator they're building for you. And that concrete iterator needs to know exactly which aggregate. It's being built for Those two are linked together. So the concrete innerator will be constructed specifically for the concrete aggregate and it will pass in itself as the constructor. But from the client's point of view. They can't tell that that link is there. From the client's point of view, they know they had an aggregate, they know they called for its iterator and they got an iterator. They know it's got haznes next and removed, but they don't know that there's a tight link between them, they don't have to know anything about that tight link between them. And that's why they put the client in the diagram because they're trying to show off that, yeah, the client knows about one and the other, but it knows nothing about the link. But deep down when you implement them, you have to know about the link. There's basically one of these for every one of these. So the separation is there to allow the programmer to use the same wi loop over and over. And now you're saying, jeez, that's a lot of work just to allow me to write the same well, it's not that hard to write. Size and length and get and square bracket. All you're saying is that I'm just gonna be able to write next and has next every time, why is that a win? Anybody know? Nope. It's a win when you put a bit of syntactic support behind it. The syntactic support that you've had and maybe used without realising it. See if we can, if they've got it in here. I need to see I don't see it. Mhm. I'm sure they talked about it. They did, and then they talked about a dodgy version that wasn't in iterator, so let's go down to that. Composite? What do you mean a composite for? No, it's not that's not, it's not. Come on. You don't want to miss this last bit, it's the best bit. The best bit No, because they're gonna show me. OK, um. In Java you get the win, because you get syntactic support for it. It's called a for each loop, which is a bit mis uh misguiding, misguiding. So you're used to 4 in I equals 0. I is less than whatever. I plus plus. All you're used to while. Let's say it's collection.haz next. O equals call.nex. And OK. Uh, what Java gives you. Is syntactic support for this 2nd version. That allows you to write it as 4. Um Uge It's a colon, isn't it? OK. Did I get that right? Is it Cohen? Is it the in keyword or is it the blah blah blah? But I, I actually have to put the type in here. So, cos I would actually have had to do this as. Object about. So Java gives me syntactic support for that bottom one, and if I ever write the bottom one, it automatically converts it into the top one for me. And you might not, ah, hopefully you do, it's just way better. So it's way easier and what that says is for object in collection. And then down inside the body you can use OBJ and it'll always be the latest collection. OK, so that's called the for each loop and it's the way you should do all your loops. If you don't care about order and if you're not trying to do insertion or deletion or removal, OK? Cause then you can just swap out the collection much more easily. I did read it in the book, so I'm gonna note it. There's another thing called for each in Java, which is collection. for each. Which is a different concept and doesn't use the iterator. Uh, might use it under the hood, but it's not really. Um, and we're gonna get to that when we do lambdas, which we used to do 2 weeks ago and now we're doing in 2 weeks. Um, so when someone says for each loop, they probably mean the one in the middle, even though the one down the bottom is the one that actually says for each. And why is that? That's because, uh, the first two existed in Java from the start. That second one appeared in Java 1.4 or whatever it was, and the last one didn't appear until Java 8. And so there was a long time where there was only that one in the middle, uh, and not the one at the end. OK,
